ON 27 October 1999, seven years after his mother’s death,
Prashant had gone to the block headquarters of Ersama, a small
town in coastal Orissa, some eighteen kilometr es from his village,
to spend the day with a friend.  In the evening, a dark and
menacing stor m quickly gather ed. W inds beat against the houses
with a speed and fury that Prashant had never witnessed befor e.
Heavy and incessant rain filled the darkness, ancient tr ees wer e6. Weathering the Storm in Ersama
The cyclone that hit Orissa in October 1999
killed thousands of people and dev astated
hundreds of villages. For two dreadful nights
Prashant, a young man, w as  marooned on the
roof of a house. On the third day he decided to
go to his village. Did he find his family?
Reprint 2025-26
38 / Moments
uprooted and crashed to the earth.  Scr eams r ent the air as people
and houses wer e swiftly washed away. The angry waters swirled
into his friend’s house, neck deep. The building was of brick and
mortar and was str ong enough to survive the  devastation of the
wind’s velocity of 350 km per hour . But the cold terr or of the
family gr ew with the crashing of tr ees that had got upr ooted  and
fallen on their house, some time in the middle of the night,
damaging its r oof and walls.
The crazed destruction wr ought by the cyclone and the sur ge
of the ocean continued for the next thirty-six hours, although wind
speeds had r educed somewhat by the next mor ning.  T o escape
the waters rising in the house, Prashant and his friend’s family
had taken r efuge on the r oof.  Prashant will never for get the shock
he experienced at his first glimpse of the devastation wr ought by
the super cyclone, in the gr ey light of the early mor ning.  A raging,
deadly, br own sheet of water cover ed everything as far as the eye
could see; only fractur ed cement houses still stood in a few places.
Bloated animal car casses and human corpses floated in every
direction.  All r ound even huge old tr ees had fallen.  T wo coconut
trees had fallen on the roof of their house.  This was a blessing in
disguise, because the tender coconuts fr om the tr ees kept the
trapped family fr om starving in the several days that followed.
For the next two days, Prashant sat huddled with his friend’s
family in the open on the r ooftop.  They fr oze in the cold and incessant
rain; the rain water washed away Prashant’s tears.  The only thought
that flashed thr ough his mind was whether his family had survived
the fury of the super cyclone.  Was he to be ber eaved once again?
Two days later , which seemed to Prashant like two years, the
rain ceased and the rain waters slowly began to r ecede. Prashant
was deter mined to seek out his family without further delay.  But
the situation was still danger ous, and his friend’s family pleaded
with Prashant to stay back a little while longer .  But Prashant
knew he had to go.
He equipped himself with a long, stur dy stick, and then started
on his eighteen-kilometr e expedition back to his village thr ough
the swollen flood waters.  It was a jour ney he would never for get.
He constantly had to use his stick to locate the r oad, to deter mine
Reprint 2025-26
Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 39
wher e the water was most shallow.  At places it was waist deep,
and pr ogress was slow.  At several points, he lost the r oad and
had to swim.  After some distance, he was r elieved to find two
friends of his uncle who wer e also r eturning to their village. They
decided to move ahead together .
As they waded thr ough the waters, the scenes they witnessed
grew mor e and mor e macabr e.  They had to push away many
human bodies — men, women, childr en — and car casses of dogs,
goats and cattle that the curr ent swept against them as they moved
ahead.  In every village that they passed, they could bar ely see a
house standing.  Prashant now wept out loud and long.  He was
sure that his family could not have survived this catastr ophe.
Eventually, Prashant r eached his village, Kalikuda. His heart
went cold. Wher e their home once stood, ther e wer e only
remnants of its r oof.  Some of their belongings wer e caught,
mangled and twisted in the branches of tr ees just visible above
the dark waters. Y oung Prashant decided to go to the Red Cr oss
shelter to look for his family.
Among the first people he saw in the cr owd was his mater nal
grandmother .  Weak with hunger , she rushed to him, her hands
outstr etched, her eyes brimming.  It was a miracle.  They had
long given him up for dead.
Quickly wor d spr ead and his extended family gather ed around
him, and hugged him tight in r elief. Prashant anxiously scanned
the motley, batter ed gr oup. His br other and sister , his uncles
and aunts, they all seemed to be ther e.
Reprint 2025-26
40 / Moments
By the next mor ning, as he took in the desperate situation in
the shelter , he decided to get a grip over himself.  He sensed a
deathly grief settling upon the 2500 str ong cr owd in the shelter .
Eighty-six lives wer e lost in the village.  All the ninety-six houses
had been washed away. It was their fourth day at the shelter .  So
far they had survived on gr een coconuts, but ther e wer e too few
to go ar ound such a tumult of people.
Prashant, all of nineteen years, decided to step in
as leader of his village, if no one else did. He or ganised
a group of youths and elders to jointly pr essurise the
merchant once again to part with his rice.  This time
the delegation succeeded and r eturned triumphantly,
wading thr ough the r eceding waters with food for the
entire shelter .  No one car ed that the rice was alr eady
rotting. Branches fr om fallen tr ees wer e gather ed to
light a r eluctant and slow fir e, on which to cook the
rice.  For the first time in four days, the survivors at
the cyclone shelter wer e able to fill their bellies. His
next task was to or ganise a team of youth volunteers to
clean the shelter of filth, urine, vomit and floating
carcasses, and to tend to the wounds and fractur es of
the many who had been injur ed.
On the fifth day, a military helicopter flew over the
shelter and dr opped some food par cels.  It then did
not r eturn. The youth task for ce gather ed empty
Reprint 2025-26
Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 41
utensils fr om the shelter .
Then  they deputed the
childr en to lie in the sand
left by the waters ar ound
the shelter with these
utensils on their  stomachs,
to communicate to the
passing helicopters that they
were hungry.  The message
got thr ough, and after that
the helicopter made r egular
rounds  of the shelter ,
airdropping food and other
basic needs.
Prashant found that a
large number of childr en had
been orphaned.  He br ought
them together and put up a
polythene sheet shelter for
them.  Women were mobilised
to look after them, while the
men secur ed food and
materials for the shelter .
As the weeks passed,
Prashant was quick to
recognise that the women
and childr en wer e sinking
deeper and deeper in their
grief. He persuaded the women to start working in the food-for -
work pr ogramme started by an NGO, and for the childr en he
organised sports events. He himself loved to play cricket, and so
he or ganised cricket matches for childr en.  Prashant engaged,
with other volunteers, in helping the widows and childr en to pick
up the br oken pieces of their lives. The initial gover nment plan
was to set up institutions for orphans and widows. However , this
step was successfully r esisted, as it was felt that in such
institutions, childr en would gr ow up without love, and widows
Reprint 2025-26
42 / Moments
would suf fer from stigma and loneliness. Prashant’s gr oup believed
orphans should be r esettled in their own community itself, possibly
in new foster families made up of childless widows and childr en
without adult car e.
It is six months after the devastation of the super cyclone.
This time Prashant’s wounded spirit has healed simply because
he had no time to bother about his own pain.  His handsome,
youthful face is what the widows and orphaned childr en of his
village seek out most in their darkest hour of grief.
HARSH MANDER
Glossary
menacing: danger ous and har mful
incessant:  unceasing; continual
swirled: moved or flowed along with a whirling motion
carcasses: dead bodies of animals
bereaved: lost a close r elation or friend thr ough his/her death
remnants: small r emaining quantities
motley: disparate; varied  in  appearance or character
tumult: upr oar of a disor derly cr owd
1.What havoc has the super cyclone wr eaked in the life of the
people of Orissa?
2.How has Prashant, a teenager , been able to help the people
of his village?
3.How have the people of the community helped one another?
What r ole do the women of Kalikuda play during these days?
4.Why do Prashant and other volunteers r esist the plan to set
up institutions for orphans and widows? What alter natives
do they consider?
T TT TTHINK HINKHINKHINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I  I IT TT TT
Reprint 2025-26
Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 43
5.Do you think Prashant is a good leader? Do you think young
people can get together to help people during natural
calamities?
Talk about the pr eparedness of the community for a natural
disaster .
(You can talk about evacuation plans and r ehabilitation; per manent
safe shelters; war ning systems; r elief ef forts; building materials
to withstand cyclone/flood/earthquake , i.e. safe housing; peoples’
organisation of their own r escue ; the survival instinct, etc.)
/circle6‘A Home on the Str eet’ by Harsh Mander
/circle6‘Paying for His T ea’ by Harsh Mander
/circle6Eton Munda W on the Battle by Mahasweta Devi
T TT TTALK ALKALKALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I  I IT TT TT
S SS SSUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26