IN the Kingdom of Fools, both the king and the minister wer e idiots.
They didn’t want to run things like other kings, so they decided to
change night into day and day into night. They or dered that everyone
should be awake at night, till their fields and run their businesses
only after dark, and go to bed as soon as the sun came up. Anyone
who disobeyed would be punished with death. The people did as
they wer e told for fear of death. The king and the minister wer e
delighted at the success of their pr oject. One day a guru and his
disciple arrived in the city. It was a beautiful city, it was br oad
daylight, but ther e was no one about. Everyone was asleep, not a
mouse stirring. Even the cattle had been taught to sleep by day.
The two strangers wer e amazed by what they saw ar ound them
and wander ed around town till evening, when suddenly the whole
town woke up and went about its nightly business.
The two men wer e hungry. Now that the shops wer e open,
they went to buy some gr oceries. T o their astonishment, they
found that everything cost the same, a single duddu — whether
they bought a measur e of rice or a bunch of bananas, it cost a
duddu . The guru and his disciple wer e delighted. They had never
heard of anything like this. They could buy all the food they
wanted for a rupee.
When they had cooked and eaten, the guru r ealised that this
was a kingdom of fools and it wouldn’t be a good idea for them to
stay ther e. “This is no place for us. Let’s go,” he said to his disciple.
But the disciple didn’t want to leave the place. Everything was
cheap her e. All he wanted was good, cheap food. The guru said,4. In the Kingdom of Fools
It is believed that fools are so dangerous that only
very wise people can manage them. Who are the
fools in this story? What happens to them?
Reprint 2025-26
20 / Moments
“They ar e all fools. This won’t last very long, and you can’t tell
what they’ll do to you next.”
But the disciple wouldn’t listen to the guru’s wisdom. He
wanted to stay. The guru finally gave up and said, “Do what you
want. I’m going,” and left. The disciple stayed on, ate his fill every
day — bananas and ghee and rice and wheat, and gr ew fat like a
street-side sacr ed bull.
One bright day, a thief br oke into a rich mer chant’s house. He
had made a hole in the wall and sneaked in, and as he was carrying
out his loot, the wall of the old house collapsed on his head and
killed him on the spot.  His br other ran to the king and complained,
“Your Highness, when my brother was pursuing his ancient trade,
a wall fell on him and killed him. This mer chant is to blame. He
should have built a good, str ong wall. Y ou must
punish the wr ongdoer and compensate the family
for this injustice.”
The king said, “Justice will be done. Don’t
worry,”  and at once summoned the owner of
the house.
Reprint 2025-26
In the Kingdom of Fools/ 21
When the mer chant arrived, the king questioned him.
“What’s your name?”
“Such and Such, Y our Highness.”
“Were you at home when the dead man bur gled your house?”
“Yes, My Lor d. He br oke in and the wall was weak. It fell on him.”
“The accused pleads guilty. Y our wall killed this man’s br other .
You have mur dered a man. W e have to punish you.”
“Lord,” said the helpless mer chant, “I didn’t put up the wall.
It’s really the fault of the man who built the wall. He didn’t build
it right. Y ou should punish him.”
“Who is that?”
“My Lor d, this wall was built in my father’s time. I know the
man. He’s an old man now. He lives nearby.”
The king sent out messengers to bring in the bricklayer who
had built the wall. They br ought him, tied hand and foot.
“You ther e, did you build this man’s wall in his father’s time?”
“Yes, My Lor d, I did.”
“What kind of a wall is this that you built? It has fallen on a
poor man and killed him. Y ou’ve mur dered him. W e have to punish
you by death.”
Befor e the king could or der the execution, the poor bricklayer
pleaded, “Please listen to me befor e you give your or ders. It’s true
I built this wall and it was no good. But that was because my
mind was not on it. I r emember very well a dancing girl  who was
going up and down that str eet all day with her anklets jingling,
and I couldn’t keep my eyes or my mind on the wall I was building.
You must get that dancing girl. I know wher e she lives.”
“You’re right. The case deepens. W e must look into it. It is not
easy to judge such complicated cases. Let’s get that dancer ,
wher
ever she is.”
The dancing girl, now an old woman, came tr embling to
the court.
“Did you walk up and down that str eet many years ago, while
this poor man was building a wall? Did you see him?”
“Yes, My Lor d, I r emember it very well.”
“So you did walk up and down, with your anklets jingling.
You wer e young and you distracted him, so he built a bad wall.
Reprint 2025-26
22 / Moments
It has fallen on a poor bur glar and
killed him. Y ou’ve killed an innocent
man. Y ou’ll have to be punished.”
She thought for a minute and said,
“My Lor d, wait. I know now why I was
walking up and down that str eet. I
had given some gold to the goldsmith
to make some jewellery for me. He
was a lazy scoundr el. He made so
many excuses, said he would give it
now and he would give it then and
so on all day. He made me walk up
and down to his house a dozen times.
That was when this bricklayer saw me. It’s
not my fault, My Lor d, it’s the damned
goldsmith’s fault.”
“Poor thing, she’s absolutely right,”
thought the king, weighing the evidence.
“We’ve got the r eal culprit at last. Get the
goldsmith, wher ever he is hiding. At once!”
The king’s bailif fs sear ched for the
goldsmith, who was hiding in a cor ner of
his shop. When he hear d the accusation
against him, he had his own story to tell.
“My Lor d,” he said, “I’m a poor
goldsmith. It’s true I made this dancer
come many times to my door . I gave her
excuses because I couldn’t finish making
her jewellery befor e I finished the rich
merchant’s or ders. They had a wedding
coming, and they wouldn’t wait. Y ou know
how impatient rich men ar e!”
“Who is this rich mer chant who kept
you fr om finishing this poor woman’s
jewellery, made her walk up and down,
which  distracted this bricklayer , which
made a mess of his wall, which has now
Reprint 2025-26
In the Kingdom of Fools/ 23
fallen on an innocent man and killed him?
Can you name him?”
The goldsmith named the mer chant, and
he was none other than the original owner of
the house whose wall had fallen. Now justice
had come full cir cle, thought the king, back to
the mer chant. When he was rudely summoned
back to the court, he arrived crying, “It wasn’t
me but my father who or dered the jewellery!
He’s dead! I’m innocent!”
But the king consulted his minister and ruled
decisively: “It’s true your father is the true
murderer. He’s dead, but somebody must be
punished in his place. Y ou’ve inherited
everything fr om that criminal father of yours,
his riches as well as his sins. I knew at once,
even when I first set eyes on you, that you wer e
at the r oot of this horrible crime. Y ou must die.”
And he or dered a new stake to be made
ready for the execution. As the servants
sharpened the stake and got it r eady for the
final impaling of the criminal, it occurr ed to
the minister that the rich mer chant was
somehow too thin to be pr operly executed on
the stake. He appealed to the king’s common
sense. The king too worried about it.
“What shall we do?” he said, when
suddenly it struck him that all they needed
to do was to find a man fat
enough to fit the stake. The
servants wer e immediately sent
all over the town looking for a
man who would fit the stake,
and their eyes fell on the
disciple who had fattened
himself for months on bananas
and rice and wheat and ghee.
Reprint 2025-26
24 / Moments
“What have I done wr ong? I’m innocent. I’m a sanyasi!” he cried.
“That may be true. But it’s the r oyal decr ee that we should
find a man fat enough to fit the stake,” they said, and carried him
to the place of execution. He r emember ed his wise guru’s wor ds:
“This is a city of fools. Y ou don’t know what they will do next.”
While he was waiting for death, he prayed to his guru in his heart,
asking him to hear his cry wher ever he was. The guru saw
everything in a vision; he had magic powers, he could see far ,
and he could see the futur e as he could see the pr esent and the
past. He arrived at once to save his disciple, who had got himself
into such a scrape thr ough love of food.
As soon as he arrived, he scolded the disciple and told him
something in a whisper . Then he went to the king and addr essed
him, “O wisest of kings, who is gr eater? The guru or the disciple?”
“Of course, the guru. No doubt about it. Why  do you ask?”
“Then put me to the stake first. Put my disciple to death after me.”
Reprint 2025-26
In the Kingdom of Fools/ 25
When the disciple hear d this, he understood and began to
clamour , “Me first!  Y ou br ought me her e first! Put me to death
first, not him!”
The guru and the disciple now got into a fight about who should
go first. The king was puzzled by this behaviour . He asked the
guru, “Why do you want to die? W e chose him because we needed
a fat man for the stake.”
“You shouldn’t ask me such questions. Put me to death first,”
replied the guru.
“Why? Ther e’s some mystery her e. As a wise man you must
make me understand.”
“Will you pr omise to put me to death if I tell you?” asked the
guru. The king gave him his solemn wor d. The guru took him
aside, out of the servants’ earshot, and whisper ed to him, “Do you
know why we want to die right now, the two of us? W e’ve been all
over the world but we’ve never found a city like this or a king like
you. That stake is the stake of the god of justice. It’s new, it has
never had a criminal on it. Whoever dies on it first will be r eborn as
the king of this country. And whoever goes next will be the futur e
minister of this country. W e’re sick of our ascetic life. It would be
nice to enjoy ourselves as king and minister for a while. Now keep
your wor d, My Lor d, and put us to death. Me first, r emember?”
The king was now thr own into deep thought. He didn’t want
to lose the kingdom to someone else in the next r ound of life. He
needed time. So he or dered the execution postponed to the next
day and talked in secr et with his minister . “It’s not right for us to
give over the kingdom to others in the next life. Let’s go on the
stake ourselves and we’ll be r eborn as king and minister again.
Holy men do not tell lies,” he said, and the minister agr eed.
So he told the executioners, “W e’ll send the criminals tonight.
When the first man comes to you, put him to death first. Then do
the same to the second man. Those ar e my or ders. Don’t make
any mistake.”
That night, the king and his minister went secr etly to the
prison, r eleased the guru and the disciple, disguised themselves
as the two, and as arranged befor ehand with loyal servants, wer e
taken to the stake and pr omptly executed.
Reprint 2025-26
26 / Moments
When the bodies wer e taken down to be thr own to cr ows and
vultur es the people panicked. They saw befor e them the dead
bodies of the king and the minister . The city was in confusion.
All night they mour ned and discussed the futur e of the
kingdom. Some people suddenly thought of the guru and the
disciple and caught up with them as they wer e preparing to leave
town unnoticed. “W e people need a king and a minister ,” said
someone. Others agr eed. They begged the guru and the disciple
to be their king and their minister . It didn’t take many ar guments
to persuade the disciple, but it took longer to persuade the guru.
They finally agr eed to rule the kingdom of the foolish king and
the silly minister , on the condition that they could change all the
old laws.
From then on, night would again be night and day would again
be day, and you could get nothing for a duddu . It became like any
other place.
[A Kannada folktal e from A.K. Ramanujan’s
Folk Tales from Indi a]
Reprint 2025-26
In the Kingdom of Fools/ 27
Glossary
bailif f: a law of ficer who makes sur e that the decisions of a court
are obeyed
scrape:  a dif ficult situation that one has got into
1.What ar e the two strange things the guru and his disciple
find in the Kingdom of Fools?
2.Why does the disciple decide to stay in the Kingdom of Fools?
Is it a good idea?
3.Name all the people who ar e tried in the king’s court, and give
the reasons for their trial.
4.Who is the r
eal culprit according to the king? Why does he
escape punishment?
5.What ar e the Guru’s wor ds of wisdom? When does the disciple
remember them?
6.How does the guru manage to save his disciple’s life?
In Shakespear e’s plays the fool is not r eally foolish. If you have
read or seen Shakespear e’s plays such as King Lear , As Y ou Like
It, Twelfth Night, you may talk about the role of the fool.
Do you know any stories in your language about wise fools, such
as Tenali Rama or Gopal Bhar? Y ou can also r ead about them in
Ramanujan’s collection of folk tales.
/circle6Tales fr om Shakespear e by Charles and Mary Lamb
/circle6Folk T ales fr om India: A Selection of Oral T ales fr om T wenty-
two Languages  Selected and Edited by  A.K. Ramanujan
/circle6Classic Folk T ales fr om Ar ound the W orld Edited by Robert Nye
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26