MY first year of high school felt awkwar d. After leaving junior
high at the head of my class with all the seniority the upper grade
levels could af ford me, it felt strange starting over as a fr eshman.
The school was twice as big as my old school, and to make matters
worse, my closest friends wer e sent to a dif ferent high school. I
felt very isolated.
I missed my old teachers so much that I would go back and
visit them. They would encourage me to get involved in school
activities so that I could meet new people. They told me that in
time I would adjust and pr obably end up loving my new school
more than I had my old one. They made me pr omise that when
that happened I would still come by and visit them fr om time to
time. I understood the psychology in what they wer e saying, but
I took some comfort in it nonetheless.
One Sunday after noon, not long after I had started high
school, I was sitting at home at our dining-r oom table doing
homework. It was a cold and windy fall day, and we had a fir e
going in our fir eplace. As usual, my r ed tabby cat was lying on
top of all my papers, purring loudly and occasionally swatting at
my pen for entertainment’s sake.
She was never far fr om me. I had r escued her when she was
a kitten, and somehow she knew that I was the one r esponsible
for giving her ‘the good life’.
My mother kept stoking the fir e to keep the house nice and
warm. Suddenly, I smelled something strange, and then I noticed
it... smoke pouring in thr ough the seams of the ceiling. The smoke
began to fill the r oom so quickly that we could barely see. Gr oping8. A House Is Not a Home
This story reflects the challenges of being a teenager ,
and the problems of growing up. How does the author
overcome his problems?
Reprint 2025-26
50 / Moments
our way to the fr ont door , we all ran out into the fr ont yar d. By
the time we made our way outside, the whole r oof was engulfed
in flames and it was spr eading quickly. I ran to the neighbours to
call the fir e department, while I watched my mother run back
into the house.
My mother then ran out of the house carrying a small metal
box full of important documents. She dr opped the case on the
lawn and, in a crazed state, ran back into the house. I knew what
she was after . My father had died when I was young, and I was
certain that she was not going to let his pictur es and letters go up
in flames. They wer e the only things that she had to r emember
him by. Still I scr eamed at her , “Mom! No!”
I was about to run after her when I felt a lar ge hand hold me
back. It was a fir eman. I hadn’t even noticed that the str eet had
already filled with fir e trucks. I was trying to fr ee myself fr om his
grasp, yelling, “Y ou don’t understand, my mother’s in ther e!”
He held on to me while other fir efighters ran into the house.
He knew that I wasn’t acting very logically and that if he wer e to
let go, I’d run. He was right.
“It’s all right, they’ll get her ,” he said.
He wrapped a blanket ar ound me and sat me down in our
car. Soon after that, a fir eman emer ged fr om our house with
Reprint 2025-26
A House Is Not a Home / 51
my mom in tow. He quickly took her over to the truck and put
an oxygen mask on her . I ran over and hugged her . All th ose
times I ever ar
gued with her and hated her vanished at the
thought of losing her .
“She’s going to be okay, ” said the fir eman. “She just
inhaled a little smoke. ” And then he ran back to fight the fir e
while my mother and I sat ther e dazed. I r emember watching
my house bur n down and thinking that ther e was nothing I
could do about it.
Five hours later , the fir e was finally out. Our house was almost
completely bur ned down. But then it struck m e...I hadn’t seen
my cat. Wher e was my cat? Much to my horr or, I realised that
she was nowher e to be found. Then all at once it hit me —the
new school, the fir e, my cat —I broke down in tears and cried
and cried. I was suf fering loss, big time.
The fir emen wouldn’t let us go back into the house that night.
It was still too danger ous. Dead or alive, I couldn’t imagine leaving
without knowing about my cat. Regar dless, I had to go. W e piled
into the car with just the clothes on our backs and a few of the
firemen’s blankets, and made our way to my grandpar ents’ house
to spend the night.
The next day, Monday, I went to school. When the fir e broke
out, I was still wearing the dr ess I had wor n to chur ch that mor ning
but I had no shoes! I had kicked them of f when I was doing my
homework. They became yet another casualty of the fir e. So I had
to borr ow some tennis shoes fr om my aunt. Why couldn’t I just
stay home fr om school? My mother wouldn’t hear of it, but I was
totally embarrassed by everything. The clothes I was wearing
looked weir d, I had no books or homework, and my backpack
was gone. I had my life in that backpack! The mor e I tried to fit in,
the worse it got. W as I destined to be an outcast and a geek all my
life? That’s what it felt like. I didn’t want to gr ow up, change or
have to handle life if it was going to be this way. I just wanted to
curl up and die.
I walked ar ound school like a zombie. Everything felt surr eal,
and I wasn’t sur e what was going to happen. All the security I
had known, fr om my old school, my friends, my house and my
cat had all been ripped away.
Reprint 2025-26
52 / Moments
When I walked thr ough what used to be my house after school
that day, I was shocked to see how much damage ther e was —
whatever hadn’t bur ned was destr oyed by the water and chemicals
they had used to put out the fir e. The only material things not
destr oyed wer e the photo albums, documents and some other
personal items that my mother had managed to her oically r escue.
But my cat was gone and my heart ached for her .
There was no time to grieve. My mother rushed me out of the
house. W e would have to find a place to live, and I would have to
go buy some clothes for school.
We had to borr ow money fr om my grandpar ents because ther e
were no cr edit car ds, cash or even any identification to be able to
withdraw money fr om the bank. Everything had gone up in smoke.
That week the rubble that used to be our house was being
cleared of f the lot. Even though we had r ented an apartment
nearby, I would go over to watch them clear away debris, hoping
that my cat was somewher e to be found. She was gone. I kept
thinking about her as that vulnerable little kitten. In the early
morning when I would disturb her and get out of bed, she would
tag along after me, climb up my r obe and crawl into my pocket to
fall asleep. I was missing her terribly.
It always seems that bad news spr eads quickly, and in my
case it was no dif ferent. Everyone in high school, including the
teachers, was awar e of my plight. I was embarrassed as if somehow
I wer e responsible. What a way to start of f at a new school! This
was not the kind of attention I was looking for .
The next day at school, people wer e acting even mor e strange
than usual. I was getting r eady for gym class at my locker . People
were milling ar ound me, asking me to hurry up. I thought it
strange, but in the light of the past few weeks, nothing would
surprise me. It almost seemed that they wer e trying to shove me
into the gym —then I saw why. Ther e was a big table set up with
all kinds of stuf f on it, just for me. They had taken up a collection
and bought me school supplies, notebooks, all kinds of dif ferent
clothes —jeans, tops, sweatsuits. It was like Christmas. I was
overcome by emotion. People who had never spoken to me befor e
were coming up to me to intr oduce themselves. I got all kinds of
invitations to their houses. Their genuine outpouring of concer n
Reprint 2025-26
A House Is Not a Home / 53
really touched me. In that instant, I finally br eathed a sigh of
relief and thought for the first time that things wer e going to be
okay. I made friends that day.
A month later , I was at my house watching them r ebuild it.
But this time it was dif ferent—I wasn’t alone. I was with two of
my new friends fr om school. It took a fir e for me to stop focusing
on my feelings of insecurity and open up to all the wonder ful
people ar ound me. Now I was sitting ther e watching my house
being r ebuilt when I r ealised my life was doing the same thing.
While we sat ther e on the curb, planning my new bedr oom,
I hear d someone walk up to me fr om behind and say, “Does this
belong to you?” When I tur ned ar ound to see who it was, I couldn’t
believe my eyes. A woman was standing ther e holding my cat! I
leapt up and grabbed her out of the woman’s ar ms. I held her
Reprint 2025-26
54 / Moments
close to me and cried into that beautiful orange fur . She purr ed
happily. My friends wer e hugging me, hugging the cat and
jumping ar ound.
Appar ently, my cat had been so fr eaked by the fir e that she
ran over a mile away. Her collar had our phone number on it, but
our phones had been destr oyed and disconnected. This wonder ful
woman took her in and worked har d to find out whose cat it was.
Somehow, she knew this cat was loved and sor ely missed.
As I sat ther e with my friends and my cat curled up in my
lap, all the overwhelming feelings of loss and tragedy seemed to
diminish. I felt gratitude for my life, my new friends, the kindness
of a stranger and the loud purr of my beloved cat. My cat was
back and so was I.
ZAN GAUDIOSO
Glossary
stoking the fir e: feeding and tending the fir e
zombie:  a dull and apathetic person
surreal: strange; bizarr
e
milling ar ound: moving in an aimless manner
shove: push har d
1.What does the author notice one Sunday after noon? What is
his mother’s r eaction? What does she do?
2.Why does he break down in tears after the fir e?
3.Why is the author deeply embarrassed the next day in school?
Which wor ds show his fear and insecurity?
4.The cat and the author are very fond of each other . How has
this been shown in the story? Where was the cat after the
fire? Who brings it back and how?
5.What actions of the  schoolmates change  the author’s
understanding of life and people, and comfort him
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
Reprint 2025-26
A House Is Not a Home / 55
emotionally? How does his loneliness vanish and how does
he start participating in life?
6.What is the meaning of “My cat was back and so was I ”?
Had the author gone anywher e? Why does he say that he
is also back?
Have any of your classmates/schoolmates had an experience
like the one described  in the story wher e they needed help?
Describe how they wer e helped.
/circle6Her Story So Far: T ales of the Girl Child in India edited by
Monica Das
/circle6Moder n Hindi Stories edited by Indu Jain
/circle6Malgudi Days by R.K. Narayan
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26