THE story was narrated to Ganesh by a young man, Mahendra by
name. He was a junior supervisor in a fir m which of fered on hir e
supervisors at various types of construction sites: factories, bridges,
dams, and so on. Mahendra’s job was to keep an eye on the activities
at the work site. He had to keep moving fr om place to place every
now and then as or dered by his head of fice: fr om a coal mining
area to a railway bridge construction site, fr om ther e after a few
months to a chemical plant which was coming up somewher e.
3.  Isw aran the Storyteller
One night Mahendra woke up from his sleep and
saw “a dark cloudy form”. He broke out into a cold
sweat. W as it a ghost?
Reprint 2025-26
Iswaran the Storyteller/ 13
He was a bachelor . His needs wer e simple and he was able to
adjust himself to all kinds of odd conditions, whether it was an
ill-equipped cir cuit house or a makeshift canvas tent in the
middle of a stone quarry. But one asset he had was his cook,
Iswaran. The cook was quite attached to Mahendra and followed
him uncomplainingly wher ever he was posted. He cooked for
Mahendra, washed his clothes and chatted away with his master
at night. He could weave out endless stories and anecdotes on
varied subjects.
Iswaran also had an amazing capacity to pr oduce vegetables
and cooking ingr edients, seemingly out of nowher e, in the middle
of a desolate landscape with no shops visible for miles ar ound.
He would miraculously conjur e up the most delicious dishes made
with fr esh vegetables within an hour of arriving at the zinc-sheet
shelter at the new workplace.
Mahendra would be up early in the mor ning and leave for
work after br eakfast, carrying some pr epared food with him.
Meanwhile Iswaran would tidy up the shed, wash the clothes,
and have a leisur ely bath, pouring several buckets of water over
his head, mutteri ng a prayer all the while. It would be lunchtime
by then. After eating, he would read for a while before dozing
off. The book was usually some popular T amil thriller running
to hundr eds of pages. Its imaginative descriptions and  narrat ive
flourishes would hold Iswaran in thrall.
His own descriptions wer e greatly influenced by the T amil
authors that he r ead.  When he was narrating even the smallest
of incidents, he would try to work in suspense and a surprise
ending into the account. For example, instead of saying that
he had come acr oss an upr ooted tr ee on the highway, he would
say, with eyebr
ows suitably ar ched and hands held out in a
dramatic gesture, “The r oad was deserted and I was all alone.
Suddenly I spotted something that looked like an enor mous
bushy beast lying sprawled acr oss the r oad. I was half inclined
to tur n and go back. But as I came closer I saw that it was a
fallen tree, with its dry branches spr ead out.” Mahendra would
stretch himself back in his canvas chair and listen to Iswaran’s
tales uncritically.
Reprint 2025-26
14 / Moments
“The place I come fr om is famous for timber ,” Iswaran would
begin. “Ther e is a richly wooded for est all ar ound. The logs ar e
hauled on to the lorries by elephants. They ar e huge well-fed
beasts. When they tur n wild even the most experienced mahout
is not able to contr ol them.” After this pr ologue Iswaran would
launch into an elaborate anecdote involving an elephant.
“One day a tusker escaped fr om the timber yar d and began to
roam about, stamping on bushes, tearing up wild cr eepers and
breaking branches at will. Y ou know, sir , how an elephant behaves
when it goes mad.”  Iswaran would get so caught up in the
excitement of his own story that he would get up fr om the floor
and jump about, stamping his feet in emulation of the mad elephant.
“The elephant r eached the outskirts of our town; br eaking the
fences down like matchsticks,” he would continue. “It came into
the main r oad and smashed all the stalls selling fruits, mud pots
and clothes. People ran helter -skelter in panic! The elephant now
enter ed a school gr ound wher e childr en wer e playing, br eaking
through the brick wall. All the boys ran into the classr ooms and
shut the doors tight. The beast grunted and wander ed about,
pulling out the football goal-post, tearing down the volleyball net,
kicking and flattening the drum kept for water , and upr ooting
the shrubs. Meanwhile all the teachers had climbed up to the
terrace of the school building; fr om ther e they helplessly watched
the depr edations of the elephant. Ther e was not a soul below on
the gr ound. The str eets wer e empty as if the inhabitants of the
entire town had suddenly disappear ed.
“I was studying in the junior class at that time, and was
watching the whole drama fr om the r ooftop. I don’t know what
came over me suddenly. I grabbed a cane fr om the hands of one
of the teachers and ran down the stairs and into the open. The
elephant grunted and menacingly swung a branch of a tr ee  which
it held in its trunk. It stamped its feet, kicking up a lot of mud
and dust. It looked frightening. But I moved slowly towar ds it,
stick in hand. People wer
e watching the scene hypnotised fr om
nearby housetops. The elephant looked at me r ed-eyed, r eady to
rush towar ds me. It lifted its trunk and trumpeted loudly. At that
moment I moved forwar d and, mustering all my for ce, whacked
Reprint 2025-26
Iswaran the Storyteller/ 15
its thir d toenail on the quick. The beast looked stunned for a
moment; then it shiver ed from head to foot — and collapsed.”
At this point Iswaran would leave the story unfinished, and
get up mumbling, “I will be back after lighting the gas and war ming
up the dinner .” Mahendra who had been listening w ith rapt
attention would be left hanging. When he r eturned, Iswaran
would not pick up the thr ead of the story right away. Mahendra
would have to r emind him that the conclusion was pending.
“Well, a veterinary doctor was summoned to r evive the animal,”
Iswaran would 
shrug casually. “Two days later it was led away by
its mahout to the jungle.”
“Well, how did you manage to do it, Iswaran — how did you
bring down the beast?”
“It has something to do with a Japanese art, I think, sir . Karate
or ju-jitsu it is called. I had r ead about it somewher e.  It temporarily
paralyses the nervous system, you see.”
Not a day passed without Iswaran r ecounting some story
packed with adventur e, horr or and suspense. Whether the story
was cr edible or not, Mahendra enjoyed listening to it because
of the inimitable way in which it was told. Iswaran seemed to
more than make up  for the absence of a TV in Mahendra’s
living quarters.
One mor ning when Mahendra was having br eakfast Iswaran
asked, “Can I make something special for dinner tonight, sir?
After all today is an auspicious day — accor ding to tradition we
prepare various delicacies to feed the spirits of our ancestors
today, sir .”
That night Mahendra enjoyed the most delicious dinner and
complimented Iswaran on his culinary skills. He seemed very
pleased but, unexpectedly, launched into a most garish account
involving the super natural.
“You know, sir, this entir e factory ar ea  we ar e occupying was
once a burial gr ound,” he started. Mahendra was jerked out of
the pleasant r everie he had drifted into after the satisfying meal.
“I knew on the first day itself when I saw a human  skull lying
on the path. Even now I come acr oss a number of skulls and
bones,” Iswaran continued.
Reprint 2025-26
16 / Moments
He went on to narrate how he sometimes saw ghosts at night.
“I am not easily frightened by these things, sir . I am a brave
fellow. But one horrible ghost of a woman which appears of f
and on at midnight during the full moon... It is an ugly cr eatur e
with matted hair and a shrivelled face, like a skeleton holding a
foetus in its ar ms.”
Mahendra shiver ed at the description and interrupted rather
sharply, “Y ou ar e crazy, Iswaran. Ther e are no such things as
ghosts or spirits. It is all a figment of your imagination. Get your
digestive system examined — and maybe your head as well. Y ou
are talking nonsense.”
He left the r oom and r etired for the night, expecting Iswaran
to sulk for a couple of days. But the next mor ning he was surprised
to find the cook as cheer ful and talkative as ever .
From that day on Mahendra, for all his brave talk, went to bed
with a certain unease. Every night he peer ed into the darkness
Reprint 2025-26
Iswaran the Storyteller/ 17
outside thr ough the window next to his bed, trying to make sur e
that ther e was no movement of dark shapes in the vicinity. But
he could only see a sea of darkness with the twinkling lights of
the factory miles away.
He had always liked to admir e the milk-white landscape on
full-moon nights. But after hearing Iswaran’s story of the female
ghost he avoided looking  out of his window altogether when the
moon was full.
One night , Mahendra was woken up fr om his sleep by a low
moan close to his window. At first he put it down to a cat
prowling ar ound for mice. But the sound was too guttural for a
cat. He r esisted the curiosity to look out lest he should behold
a sight which would stop his heart. But the wailing became
louder and less feline. He could not r esist the tem ptation any
more. Lowering himself to the level of the windowsill he looked
out at the white sheet of moonlight outside. Ther e, not too far
away, was a dark cloudy for m clutching a bundle. Mahendra
broke into a cold sweat and fell back on the pillow, panting.
As he gradually r ecover ed fr
om the ghastly experience he
began to r eason with himself, and finally concluded that it
must have been some sort of auto suggestion, some trick that
his subconscious had played on him.
By the time he had got up in the mor ning, had a bath and
come out to have his br eakfast, the horr or of the pr evious night
had faded fr om his memory. Iswaran gr eeted him at the door
with his lunch packet and his bag. Just as Mahendra was
stepping out Iswaran grinned and said, “Sir , remember the other
day when I was telling you about the female ghost with a foetus
in its ar ms, you wer e so angry with me for imagining things?
Well, you saw her yourself last night. I came running hearing
the sound of moaning that was coming fr om your r oom...”
A chill went down Mahendra’s spine. He did not wait for
Iswaran to complete his sentence. He hurried away to his of fice
and handed in his papers, r esolving to leave the haunted place
the very next day!
R.K. L AXMAN
Reprint 2025-26
18 / Moments
Glossary
in thrall:  the state of being in someone’s power
depredations:  attacks which ar
e made to destr oy something
guttural sound: sound pr oduced in the thr oat; harsh- sounding
feline:  relating to cats or other members of the cat family
1.In what way is Iswaran an asset to Mahendra?
2.How does Iswaran describe the upr ooted tr ee on the highway?
What ef fect does he want to create in his listeners?
3.How does he narrate the story of the tusker? Does it appear
to be plausible?
4.Why does the author say that Iswaran seemed to more than
make up for the absence of a TV in Mahendra’s living quarters?
5.Mahendra calls ghosts or spirits a figment of the imagination.
What happens to him on a full-moon night?
6.Can you think of some other ending for the story?
Is Iswaran a fascinating storyteller? Discuss with your friends
the qualities of a good storyteller . Try to use these qualities and
tell a story.
/circle6‘The Story T eller’ by Saki (H.H. Munro)
/circle6Ghost Stories  (ed.) Ruskin Bond
/circle6‘The Canterville Ghost’  by Oscar W ilde
/circle6‘Pret in the House’ by Ruskin Bond
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26