SUE and Johnsy, two young artists, shar ed a small flat. The flat
was on the thir d stor ey of an old house.
Johnsy fell very seriously ill in November . She had pneumonia.
She would lie in her bed without moving, just gazing out of the
window. Sue, her friend, became very worried. She sent for the
doctor . Although he came every day ther e was no change in
Johnsy’s condition.
One day the doctor took Sue aside and asked her , ”Is anything
worrying Johnsy?”
“No,” r eplied Sue. “But why do you ask?”
The doctor said “Johnsy, it seems, has made up her mind that
she is not going to get well. If she doesn’t want to live, medicines
will not help her .”
Sue tried her best to make Johnsy take an inter est in things
around her . She talked about clothes and fashions , but Johnsy
did not r espond. Johnsy continued to lie still on her bed. Sue
brought her drawing-boar d into Johnsy’s r oom and started
painting. T o take Johnsy’s mind of f her illness, she whistled
while working.
Suddenly Sue hear d Johnsy whisper something. She quickly
rushed to the bed and hear d Johnsy counting backwar ds. She was
looking out of the window and was saying, “Twelve!” After sometime
she whisper ed “eleven”, then “ten”, then “nine”, “eight”, “seven”. Sue
anxiously looked out of the window. She saw an old ivy cr eeper
climbing half-way up the brick wall opposite their window.  In the
strong wind outside, the cr eeper was shedding its leaves.7. The Last Leaf
It is autumn. The wind is blowing hard and it is
raining heavily . All the leaves on an ivy creeper
have fallen, except one. Why doesn’ t the last
leaf fall?
Reprint 2025-26
The Last Leaf/ 45
“What is it, dear?” Sue asked.
“Six,” whisper ed Johnsy. “They ar e falling faster now. Thr ee days
ago ther e were almost a hundr ed leaves. Ther e are only five left now.”
“It is autumn,” said Sue, “and the leaves will fall.”
“When the last leaf falls, I will die,” said Johnsy with finality.
“I have known this for the last thr ee days.”
“Oh, that’s nonsense,” r eplied Sue. “What have old ivy leaves
to do with your getting well? The doctor is confident that you will
get better .”
Johnsy did not say anything. Sue went and br ought her a
bowl of soup.
“I don’t want any soup,” said Johnsy. “I am not hungry…  Now
there are only four leaves left. I want to see the last one fall befor e
it gets dark. Then I will sleep for ever.”
Sue sat on Johnsy’s bed, kissed her and said, “Y ou ar e not
going to die. I can’t draw the curtain for I need the light. I want to
finish the painting and get some money for us. Please, my dear
Reprint 2025-26
46 / Moments
friend,” she begged Johnsy, “pr omise not to look out of the window
while I paint.”
“All right,” said Johnsy. “Finish your painting soon for I want
to see the last leaf fall. I’m tir ed of waiting. I have to die, so let me
go away peacefully like one of those poor , tired leaves.”
“Try to sleep,” said Sue. “I have to paint an old miner . I will
call Behr man up to be my model.”
Sue rushed down. Behr man lived on the gr ound floor .
He was a sixty-year -old painter . His lifelong dr eam was to
paint a masterpiece but that had r emained a dr eam. Sue pour ed
out her worries to Behr man. She told him how Johnsy was
convinced that she would die when the last leaf fell.
“Is she stupid?” asked Behr man. “How can she be so foolish?”
“She is running a high temperatur e,”complained Sue. “She
refuses to eat or drink and that worries me a lot.”
“I will come with you and see Johnsy,” Behr man said.
They tiptoed  into the r oom. Johnsy was sleeping. Sue dr ew
the curtains together and they went to the next r oom. She peeped
out thr ough the window. Ther e was only one leaf on the cr eeper .
It was raining heavily and an icy-cold wind was blowing. It seemed
as though the leaf
would fall any minute
now. Behr man did not
say a wor d. He went
back to his r oom.
Johnsy woke up
next mor ning. In a
feeble voice she asked
Sue to draw the
curtains. Sue was
nervous. She dr ew
back the curtains very
reluctantly.
“Oh!” Sue exclaimed
as she looked at the
vine cr eeper . “Look,
there is still one leaf
Reprint 2025-26
The Last Leaf/ 47
on the cr eeper . It looks quite gr een and healthy.  In spite of the stor m
and the fier ce winds, it didn’t fall.”
“I hear d the wind last night,” said Johnsy.  “I thought it would
have fallen. It will sur ely fall today. Then I’ll die.”
“You won’t die,” said Sue  energetically. “You have to live for
your friends. What would happen to me if you die?”
Johnsy smiled weakly and closed her eyes. After every hour or
so she would look out of the window and find the leaf still ther e.
It seemed to be clinging to the cr eeper .
In the evening, ther e was another stor m but the leaf did not
fall. Johnsy lay for a long time looking at the leaf. Then she called
out to Sue.
“I have been a bad girl. Y ou have looked after me so lovingly
and I have not cooperated with you. I have been depr essed and
gloomy. The last leaf has shown me how wicked I have been. I
have r ealised that it is a sin to want to die.”
Sue hugged Johnsy. Then she gave her lots of hot soup and a
mirror. Johnsy combed her hair and smiled brightly.
In the after noon the doctor came. After examining his patient  he
told Sue, “Johnsy now has the will to live. I am confident she’ll r ecover
soon. Now I must go downstairs and see Behr man. He is also suf fering
from pneumonia. But I am afraid, ther e is no hope for him.”
The next mor ning
Sue came and sat on
Johnsy’s bed. T aking
Johnsy’s hand in hers
she said, “I have
something to tell you.
Mr Behr man died
of pneumonia  this
morning. He was ill for
only two days. The first
day the janitor  found him
on his bed. His clothes
and shoes wer e wet and
he was shivering.  He
had been out in that
stormy night.”
Reprint 2025-26
48 / Moments
Then they found a ladder and a lanter n still lighted lying near
his bed. Ther e wer e also some brushes and gr een and yellow
paints on the floor near the ladder . “Johnsy dear ,” said Sue, “look
out of the window. Look at that ivy leaf. Haven’t you wonder ed
why it doesn’t flutter when the wind blows? That’s Behr man’s
masterpiece. He painted it the night the last leaf fell.”
O. H ENRY
Glossary
janitor:  a person whose job is to look after a building
1.What is Johnsy’s illness? What can cur
e her, the medicine or
the willingness to live?
2.Do you think the feeling of depr ession Johnsy has is common
among teenagers?
3.Behrman has a dr eam. What is it? Does it come true?
4.What is Behr man’s masterpiece? What makes Sue say so?
Have you ever felt depr essed and r ejected? How did you over come
such feelings? Share your experience with your classmates.
/circle6‘The Gift of the Magi’ by O.Henry
/circle6‘Dusk’ by Saki (H.H. Munro)
/circle6Chicken Soup for the T eenage Soul on T ough Stuf f: Compiled
and edited by Jack Canfield, Mark V ictor Hansen, Kimberly
Kirber ger
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
Reprint 2025-26