IT was the festival of spring. Fr om the wintry shades of narr ow
lanes and alleys emer ged a gaily clad humanity. Some walked,
some r ode on horses, others sat, being carried in bamboo and
bullock carts. One little boy ran between his father’s legs,
brimming over with life and laughter .1.  The Lost Child
A child goes to a fair with  his parents. He is happy
and excited and w ants the sweets and toys
displayed there. But his parents don’ t buy them for
him. Why then does he refuse  when someone else
offers them to him?
Reprint 2025-26
2 / Moments
“Come, child, come,” called  his par ents, as he lagged behind,
fascinated  by the toys in the shops that lined the way.
He hurried towar ds his par ents, his feet obedient to their call,
his eyes still lingering on the r eceding toys. As he came to wher e
they had stopped to wait for him, he could not suppr ess the desir e
of his heart, even though he well knew the old, cold star e of refusal
in their eyes.
“I want that toy,” he pleaded.
His father looked at him r ed-eyed, in his familiar tyrant’s way.
His mother , melted by the fr ee spirit of the day was tender and,
giving him her finger to hold, said, “Look, child, what is befor e you!”
It was  a flowering mustar d-field, pale like melting gold as it
swept acr oss miles and miles of even land.
A group of dragon-flies wer e bustling about on their gaudy
purple wings, inter cepting the flight of a lone black bee or butter fly
in sear ch of sweetness fr om the flowers. The child followed them
in the air with his gaze, till one of them would still its wings and
rest, and he would try to catch it. But it would go fluttering,
flapping, up into the air , when he had almost caught it in his
hands. Then his mother gave a cautionary call: “Come, child,
come, come on to the footpath.”
He ran towar ds his par ents gaily and walked abr east of them
for a while, being, however , soon left behind, attracted by the
little insects and wor ms along the footpath that wer e teeming out
from their hiding places to enjoy the sunshine.
“Come, child, come!” his par ents  called fr om the shade  of a
grove wher e they had seated themselves on the edge of a well. He
ran towar ds them.
A shower of young flowers fell upon the child as he enter ed
the gr ove, and, for getting his par ents, he began to gather the
raining petals in his hands. But lo! he hear d the cooing of  doves
and ran towar ds his par ents, shouting, “The dove! The dove!” The
raining petals dr opped fr om his for gotten hands.
“Come, child, come!” they called to the child, who had now
gone running in wild capers r ound  the banyan tr ee, and  gathering
him up they took the narr ow, winding footpath which led to the
fair thr
ough the mustar d fields.
Reprint 2025-26
The Lost Child / 3
As they near ed the village the child could see many other
footpaths full of thr ongs, conver ging to the whirlpool of the fair ,
and felt at once r epelled and fascinated by the confusion of the
world he was entering.
A sweetmeat seller hawked, “ gulab-jaman, rasagulla, bur fi,
jalebi ,” at the cor ner of the entrance and a cr owd pr essed r ound
his counter at the foot of an ar chitectur e of many colour ed  sweets,
decorated with leaves of silver and gold. The child star ed open-
eyed and his mouth water ed for the burfi that was his favourite
sweet. “I want that burfi,”  he slowly mur mured. But he half knew
as he begged that his plea would not be heeded because his
parents would say he was gr eedy. So without waiting for an answer
he moved on.
A flower -seller hawked, “A garland of gulmohur , a garland of
gulmohur !” The child seemed irr esistibly drawn. He went towar ds
the basket wher e the flowers lay heaped and half mur mured, “I
want that garland.” But he well knew his par ents would r efuse to
buy him those flowers because they would say that they wer e
cheap. So, without waiting for an answer , he moved on.
A man stood holding a pole with yellow, r ed, gr een and purple
balloons flying fr om it. The child was simply carried away by the
rainbow glory of their silken colours and he was filled with an
overwhelming desir e to possess them all. But he well knew his
parents would never buy him the balloons because they would
say he was too old to play with such toys. So he walked on farther .
A snake-char mer stood playing a flute to a snake which coiled
itself in a basket, its head raised in a graceful bend like the neck
of a swan, while the music stole into its invisible ears like the
gentle rippling of an invisible water fall. The child went towar ds
the snake-char mer. But, knowing his par ents had forbidden him
to hear such coarse music as the snake-char mer played, he
proceeded farther .
There was a r oundabout in full swing. Men, women and
childr en, carried away in a whirling motion, shrieked and cried
with dizzy laughter . The child watched them intently and then he
made a bold r equest: “I want to go on the r oundabout, please,
Father , Mother .”
Reprint 2025-26
4 / Moments
There was no r eply. He tur ned to look at his par ents. They wer e
not ther e, ahead of him. He tur ned to look on either side. They
were not ther e. He looked behind. Ther e was no sign of them.
A full, deep cry r ose within his dry thr oat and with a sudden
jerk of his body he ran fr om wher e he stood, crying in r eal fear ,
“Mother , Father .” Tears r olled down fr om his eyes, hot and fier ce;
his flushed face was convulsed with fear . Panic-stricken, he ran
to one side first, then to the other , hither and thither in all
directions, knowing not wher e to go. “Mother , Father ,” he wailed.
His yellow turban came untied and his clothes  became muddy.
Having run to and fr o in a rage of running for a while, he
stood defeated, his cries suppr essed into sobs. At little distances
on the gr een grass he could see, thr ough his filmy eyes, men and
women talking.  He tried to look intently among the patches of
bright yellow clothes, but ther e was no sign of his father and
mother among these people, who seemed to laugh and talk just
for the sake of laughing and talking.
He ran quickly again, this time to a shrine to which people
seemed to be cr owding. Every little inch of space her e was
congested with men, but he ran thr ough people’s legs, his little
sob lingering: “Mother , Father!” Near the entrance to the temple,
however , the cr owd became very thick: men jostled each other ,
heavy men, with flashing, mur derous eyes and hefty shoulders.
The poor child struggled to thrust a way between their feet but,
knocked to and fr o by their brutal movements, he might have
been trampled under foot, had he not shrieked at the highest
pitch of his voice, “Father , Mother!” A man in the sur ging cr owd
heard his cry and, stooping with gr eat dif ficulty, lifted him up
in his ar ms.
“How did you get her e, child? Whose baby ar e you?” the man
asked as he steer ed clear of the mass.  The child wept mor e
bitterly than ever now and only cried, “I want my mother , I
want my father!”
The man tried to soothe him by taking him to the r oundabout.
“Will you have a ride on the horse?” he gently asked as he
approached the ring.  The child’s thr oat tor e into a thousand shrill
sobs and he only shouted , “I want my mother , I want my father!”
Reprint 2025-26
The Lost Child / 5
The man headed towar ds the place wher e the snake-char mer
still played on the flute to the swaying cobra. “Listen to that
nice music, child!” he pleaded. But the child shut his ears with
his fingers and shouted his double-pitched strain: “I want my
mother , I want my father!”  The man took him near the balloons,
thinking the bright colours of the balloons would distract the
child’s attention and quieten him. “W ould you like a rainbow-
colour ed balloon?” he persuasively asked.  The child tur ned his
eyes fr om the flying balloons and just sobbed, “I want my mother ,
I want my father!”
The man, still trying to make the child happy, bor e him to the
gate wher e the flower -seller sat. “Look! Can you smell those nice
flowers, child!  W ould you like a garland to put r ound your neck?”
Reprint 2025-26
6 / Moments
The child tur ned his nose away fr om the basket and r eiterated
his sob, “I want my mother , I want my father!”
Thinking to humour his disconsolate char ge by a gift of
sweets, the man took him to the counter of the sweet shop.
“What sweets would you like, child?” he asked. The child tur ned
his face fr om the sweet shop and only sobbed, “I want my
mother , I want my father!”
MULK RAJ ANAND
1.What ar e the things the child sees on his way to the fair?
Why does he lag behind?
2.In the fair he wants many things. What ar
e they? Why does
he move on without waiting for an answer?
3.When does he r ealise that he has lost his way? How have his
anxiety and insecurity been described?
4.Why does the lost child lose interest in the things that he
had wanted earlier?
5.What do you think happens in the end? Does the child find
his parents?
How to ensure not to get lost.
/circle6The Coolie  by Mulk Raj Anand
/circle6‘Kabuliwallah’ by Rabindranath T agore
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26