GRANDF ATHER bought T oto fr om a tonga-driver for the sum of five
rupees. The tonga-driver used to keep the little r ed monkey tied
to a feeding-tr ough, and the monkey looked so out of place ther e
that Grandfather decided he would add the little fellow to his
private zoo.
Toto was a pr etty monkey. His bright eyes sparkled with
mischief beneath deep-set eyebr ows, and his teeth, which wer e a
pearly white, wer e very often displayed in a smile that frightened
the life out of elderly Anglo-lndian ladies. But his hands looked
dried-up as though they had been pickled in the sun for many
years. Y et his fingers wer e quick and wicked; and his tail, while
adding to his good looks (Grandfather believed a tail would add
to anyone’s good looks), also served as a thir d hand. He could
use it to hang fr om a branch; and it was capable of scooping up
any delicacy that might be out of r each of his hands.
Grandmother always fussed when Grandfather br ought home
some new bir d or animal. So it was decided that T oto’s pr esence
should be kept a secr et from her until she was in a particularly
good mood. Grandfather and I put him away in a little closet opening
into my bedr oom wall, wher e he was tied secur ely — or so we
thought  — to a peg fastened into the wall.
A few hours later , when Grandfather and I came back to
release T oto, we found that the walls, which had been cover ed
with some or namental paper chosen by Grandfather , now stood
out as naked brick and plaster . The peg in the wall had been
wrenched fr om its socket, and my school blazer , which had been
hanging ther e, was in shr eds. I wonder ed what Grandmother2.  The Adventures of T oto
Have you ever had a baby monkey as a pet? T oto
is a baby monkey . Let’s find out whether he is
mischievous or docile.
Reprint 2025-26
8 / Moments
would say. But Grandfather didn’t worry; he seemed pleased
with T oto’s per formance.
 “He’s clever ,” said Grandfather . “Given time, I’m sur e he could
have tied the tor n pieces of your blazer into a r ope, and made his
escape fr om the window!”
His pr esence in the house still a secr et, T oto was now
transferr ed to a big cage in the servants’ quarters wher e a number
of Grandfather’s pets lived very sociably togethe r—a tortoise, a
pair of rabbits, a tame squirr el and, for a while, my pet goat. But
the monkey wouldn’t allow any of his companions to sleep at
night; so Grandfather , who had to leave Dehra Dun next day to
collect his pension in Saharanpur , decided to take him along.
Unfortunately I could not accompany Grandfather on that trip,
but he told me about it afterwar ds. A big black canvas kit-bag
was pr ovided for T oto. This, with some straw at the bottom, became
his new abode. When the bag was closed, ther e was no escape.
Toto could not get his hands thr ough the opening, and the canvas
was too str ong for him to bite his way thr ough.  His ef forts to get
out only had the ef fect of making the bag r oll about on the floor
or occasionally jump into the air — an exhibition that attracted a
curious cr owd of onlookers on the Dehra Dun railway platfor m.
Toto r emained in the bag as far as Saharanpur , but while
Grandfather was pr oducing his ticket at the railway tur nstile,
Toto suddenly poked his head out of the bag and gave the ticket-
collector a wide grin.
The poor man was taken aback; but, with gr eat pr esence of
mind and much to Grandfather’s annoyance, he said, “Sir , you
have a dog with you.  Y ou’ll have to pay for it accor dingly.”
In vain did Grandfather take T oto out of the bag; in vain did
he try to pr ove that a monkey did not qualify as a dog, or even
as a quadruped. T oto was classified a dog by the ticket-collector;
and thr ee rupees was the sum handed over as his far e.
Then Grandfather , just to get his own back, took fr om his
pocket our pet tortoise, and said, “What must I pay for this, since
you char ge for all animals?”
The ticket-collector looked closely at the tortoise, pr odded it
with his for efinger , gave Grandfather a pleased and triumphant
look, and said, “No char ge.  It is not a dog.”
Reprint 2025-26
The Adventures of Toto/ 9
When T oto was finally accepted by Grandmother he was given
a comfortable home in the stable, wher e he had for a companion
the family donkey, Nana.  On T oto’s first night in the stable,
Grandfather paid him a visit to see if he was comfortable.  To his
surprise he found Nana, without appar ent cause, pulling at her
halter and trying to keep her head as far as possible fr om a
bundle of hay.
Grandfather gave Nana a slap acr oss her haunches, and she
jerked back, dragging T oto with her . He had fastened on to  her
long ears with his sharp little teeth.
Toto and Nana never became friends.
A great tr eat for T oto during cold winter evenings was the
large bowl of war m water given him by Grandmother for his bath.
He would cunningly test the temperatur e with his hand, then
gradually step into the bath, first one foot, then the other (as he
had seen me doing), until he was into the water up to his neck.
Reprint 2025-26
10 / Moments
Once comfortable, he would take the soap in his hands or feet,
and rub himself all over .  When the water became cold, he would
get out and run as quickly as he could to the kitchen-fir e in or der
to dry himself. If anyone laughed at him during this per formance,
Toto’s feelings would be hurt and he would r efuse to go on with
his bath. One day T oto nearly succeeded in boiling himself alive.
A large kitchen kettle had been left on the fir e to boil for tea
and T oto, finding himself with nothing better to do, decided to
remove the lid. Finding the water just war m enough for a bath,
he got in, with his head sticking out fr om the open kettle. This
was just fine for a while, until the water began to boil. T oto then
raised himself a little; but, finding it cold outside, sat down again.
He continued hopping up and down for some time, until
Grandmother arrived and hauled him, half-boiled, o ut of the kettle.
If ther e is a part of the brain especially devoted to mischief, that
part was lar gely dev eloped in T oto. He was always tearing things to
pieces. Whenever one of my  aunts came near him, he made every
effort to get hold of h er dress and te ar a hole in it.
One day,
 at lunch-time , a lar ge dish of pullao  stood in the
centr e of the dining-table. W e enter ed the r oom to find T oto stuf fing
himself with rice. My grandmother scr eamed — and T oto thr ew a
plate at her . One of my aunts rushed forwar d — and r eceived a glass
of water in the face. When Grandfather arrived, T oto picked up the
dish of pullao  and made his exit thr ough a window. W e found
him in the branches of the jackfruit tr ee, the dish still in his
arms. He r emained ther e all after noon, eating slowly thr ough the
rice, deter mined on finishing every grain. And then, in or der to
spite Grandmother , who had scr eamed at him, he thr ew the dish
down fr om the tr ee, and chatter ed with delight when it br oke into
a hundred pieces.
Obviously T oto was not the sort of pet we could keep for long.
Even Grandfather r ealised that. W e wer e not well-to-do, and could
not af ford the fr equent loss of dishes, clothes, curtains and
wallpaper . So Grandfather found the tonga-driver , and sold T oto
back to him — for only thr ee rupees.
RUSKIN BOND
Reprint 2025-26
The Adventures of Toto/ 11
Glossary
turnstile:  a mechanical gate consisting of
revolving horizontal ar ms fixed to a vertical
post, allowing only one person at a time to
pass thr ough
halter:  a rope or strap placed ar ound the head
of a horse or other animal, used for leading or tethering it
1.How does T oto come to grandfather’s private zoo?
2.“Toto was a pr etty monkey.” In what sense is T oto pr etty?
3.Why does grandfather take T oto to Saharanpur and how?
Why does the ticket collector insist on calling T oto a dog?
4.How does T oto take a bath? Wher e has he lear nt to do
this? How does T oto almost boil himself alive?
5.Why does the author say, “T oto was not the sort of pet we
could keep for long”?
Do you have a pet? Is your pet mischievous? T
ell the class
about it.
/circle6 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6My Family and Other Animals  by Gerald Durr
ell
/circle6 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6‘Grandfather’s Private Zoo’ by Ruskin Bond
/circle6 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6Jungle Book  by Rudyar d Kipling
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26