Moments
Supplementary Reader in English
for Class IX
Reprint 2025-26
First EditionFirst EditionFirst EditionFirst EditionFirst Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
ReprintedReprintedReprintedReprintedReprinted
November 2006, October 2007,
December 2009, November 2010,
January 2012, December 2012,
November 2013, December 2014,
December 2015, December 2016,
December 2017, December 2018,
August 2019, January 2021,
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised EditionRevised EditionRevised EditionRevised EditionRevised Edition
January 2023  Pausha 1944
ReprintedReprintedReprintedReprintedReprinted
March 2024  Chaitra 1946
December 2024 Agrahayana 1946
PD 130T BS
© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2023Research and Training, 2006, 2023Research and Training, 2006, 2023Research and Training, 2006, 2023Research and Training, 2006, 2023
`40.00OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata  700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCER T water mark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo  Marg, New Delhi 110016
and printed at Kalyan Enterprises,
D-20, Sector B-3, Trans Delhi
Signature City (Tronica City) Industrial
Area, Loni, Ghaziabad (U.P.) 201101ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
/boxshadowdwnNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
/boxshadowdwnThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
/boxshadowdwnThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication :M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor :Bijnan Sutar
Chief Production Officer :Jahan Lal
(In charge)
Chief Business Manager :Amitabh Kumar
Editor :Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan
Production Officer :Deepak Jaiswal
                 Illustrations                 Illustrations                 Illustrations                 Illustrations                 Illustrations
Bhushan Shaligram and Nidhi W adhwa
Cover and LayoutCover and LayoutCover and LayoutCover and LayoutCover and Layout
Nidhi W adhwaISBN  81-7450-503-20960 – M OMENTS
Textbook for Class 9
Reprint 2025-26
FOREWORD
THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between dif ferent subject ar eas. W e hope these measur es
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy of Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.  W e must
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as
rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.  The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
book proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,
rather than a source of stress or boredom.  Syllabus designers have
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
supplementary reader attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCER T) appr eciates the har d work done by the textbook development
Reprint 2025-26
iv
committee r esponsible for this book.  W e wish to thank the Chairperson
of the advisory group in languages, Professor Namwar Singh and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding the
work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this supplementary reader ; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible.  We are indebted to the institutions
and organi sations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their r esour ces, materials and personnel. W e are especially grateful
to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by
the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chair person ship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Pr ofessor G.P . Deshpande for their valuable
time and contribution. As an organi sation committed to systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCER T welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinements.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training
Reprint 2025-26
v
RATIONALISA TION OF CONTENT  IN THE
TEXTBOOK
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020 also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration
in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•Content based on genres of literature in the textbooks and supplementary
readers at different stages of school education
•Content that is meant for achieving Learning Outcomes for developing
language proficiency and is accessible at different stages
•For reducing the curriculum load and examination stress in view of the
prevailing condition of the pandemic
•Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learnt by children through
self-learning or peer-learning
•Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
Reprint 2025-26
Reprint 2025-26
A N OTE FOR THE TEACHER
MOMENTS , a supplementary reader in English for Class IX, is meant for
extensive reading. It is designed to promote a love for reading by exposing
the learners to a variety of materials.
An attempt has been made to provide learners with a rich reading
experience through stories of mystery, adventure, courage, growing
up, romance, wit and humour . These car efully selected pieces would
cater to the needs and interests of adolescents and hold the mirror up
to different aspects of life and people.
A deliberate effort has been made to gloss only some potentially
difficult words in the stories to aid the reading process. The few
questions given under ‘Think About It’ are all global questions, designed
to help learners develop their ability of intelligent and imaginative
reading. The ‘Talk about It’ section has discussion topics which take a
constructive approach to the analysis of contemporary issues. The
learners may be encouraged to interact with their classmates or seniors,
integrate their understanding of the issues and make a purposeful,
personalised, and imaginative oral presentation. A list of suggested
readings is given at the end of each story to encourage learners to
read extensively and independently.
Reprint 2025-26
THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA
PREAMBLE
Reprint 2025-26
TEXTBOOK  DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP IN LANGUAGES
Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
CHIEF ADVISOR
R. Amritavalli, Professor , Central Institute of English and For eign
Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad
CHIEF COORDINATOR
Ram Janma Sharma, Professor and Head , Department of Languages,
NCER T, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Amber Banerjee, Principal , Dehli Public School, Dagapur , Darjeeling
Road, Pradhan Nagar , Siliguri
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader in English , Department of Languages, NCER T,
New Delhi
S. Neerada, Principal, Kendriya Vidyalaya , AF 8, Rajokri, New Delhi
Sadhana Parashar , AEO (ELT), CBSE, 17, Rouse A venue, Institutional
Area, New Delhi
Shruti Sir car, Lectur er, Centr e for ESL Studies, CIEFL, Hyderabad
Sonia Makhija, TGT (English), Govt Girls’ Secondary School No. 3, Uttam
Nagar , New Delhi
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
Sandhya Rani Sahoo, Reader in English , Department of Languages,
NCER T, New Delhi
Reprint 2025-26
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a)to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b)to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c)to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d)to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e)to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f)to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g)to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h)to develop the scientific temper , humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;
(i)to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
(k)who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or , as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen
years.
Part  IV  A (Article  51 A)
Reprint 2025-26
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THE National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining is
grateful to Pr ofessor M.L. T ickoo, for merly of the Central Institute
of English and For eign Language s, Hyderabad, and  the Regional
Language Centr e, Singapor e, for going thr ough the manuscript
and making valuable suggestions.
NCER T would like to thank W estland Books Pvt. Ltd., Chennai
for ‘A House Is Not a Home’ by Zan Gaudioso;  Black Swan
Transworld Publishers, London for ‘The Accidental T ourist’ by
Bill Bryson; and  R. K. Laxman for ‘Iswaran the Storyteller’ along
with the illustrations.
Special thanks are also due to the Publication Department,
NCER T, for their support. NCER T gratefully acknowledges
the contributions made by Matthew John, Proofreader , and
Uttam Kumar , DTP Operator .
Reprint 2025-26
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
•before law and equal protection of laws;
•irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
•of opportunity in public employment;
•by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Fr eedom
•of expression, assembly , association, movement, residence and profession;
•of certain protections in respect of conviction for of fences;
•of protection of life and personal liberty;
•of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six  and fourteen years;
•of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
•for prohibition of traf fic in human beings and forced labour;
•for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Fr eedom of Religion
•freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
•freedom to manage religious af fairs;
•freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
•freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in
educational institutions wholly maintained by the S tate.
Cultural and Educational Rights
•for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture ;
•for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
•by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Reprint 2025-26
Foreword .....  iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbook.....v
A Note for the Teacher .....  vii
1.The Lost Child  .....  1
Mulk Raj Anand
2.The Adventures of Toto  .....  7
Ruskin Bond
3.Iswaran the Storyteller  .....  12
R. K. Laxman
4.In the Kingdom of Fools  .....  19
Kannada Folktale (ed.) A. K. Ramanujan
5.The Happy Prince  .....  28
Oscar Wilde
6.Weathering the Stor m in Ersama  .....  37
Harsh Mander
7.The Last Leaf  ..... 44
O. Henry
8.A House Is Not a Home  .....  49
Zan Gaudioso
9.The Beggar  .....  56
Anton ChekhovContents
Reprint 2025-26
xiv
Reprint 2025-26