HIGH above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the
Happy Prince. He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold,
for eyes he had  two bright sapphir es, and a lar ge red ruby glowed
on his swor d hilt.
One night ther e flew over the city a little swallow. His friends
had gone away to Egypt six weeks befor e, but he had stayed
behind; then he decided to go to Egypt too.
All day long he flew,
and at night time he
arrived at the city.
“Wher e shall I put
up?” he said. “I hope
the town has made
preparations.”
Then he saw the
statue on the tall column.
“I will put up  there,”
he cried. “It is a fine
position with plenty of
fresh air .” So he  alighted
just between the feet of
the Happy Prince.
“I have a golden
bed-r oom,” he said
softly to himself as he
looked r ound, and he5. The Happy Prince
The Happy Prince w as a beautiful statue. He was
covered with gold, he had sapphires for eyes, and a
ruby in his sword. Why did he w ant to part with all
the gold that he had, and his precious stones?
Reprint 2025-26
The Happy Prince/ 29
prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under
his wing a lar ge drop of water fell on him. “What a curious thing!”
he cried. “Ther e is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars ar e
quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining.”
Then another dr op fell.
“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain of f ?” he said.
“I must look for a good chimney pot,” and he deter mined to fly away.
But befor e he had opened his wings, a thir d drop fell, and he
looked up, and saw — Ah! What did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince wer e filled with tears, and tears
were running down his golden cheeks. His face was so beautiful
in the moonlight that the little swallow was filled with pity.
“Who ar e you?” he said.
“I am the Happy Prince.”
“Why ar
e you weeping then?” asked the swallow. “Y ou have
quite drenched me.”
“When I was alive and had a human heart,” answer ed the
statue, “I did not know what tears wer e, for I lived in the Palace,
where sorr ow is not allowed to enter .  My courtiers called me the
Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was. So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have set me up her e so high that I
can see the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my
heart is made of lead yet I cannot choose but weep.”
‘What! Is he not solid gold?’ said the swallow to himself. He
was too polite to make any personal r emarks.
“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far
away in a little str eet ther e is a poor house. One of the windows is
open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table. Her
face is thin and wor n, and she has coarse, r ed hands, all pricked
by the needle, for she is a seamstr ess. She is embr oidering flowers
on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen’s maids of honour ,
to wear at the next Court ball. In a bed in the cor ner of the r oom
her little boy is lying ill. He has a fever , and is asking his mother
to give him oranges. His mother has nothing to give him but river
water , so he is crying. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you
not bring her the ruby out of my swor d hilt?  My feet ar e fastened
to this pedestal and I cannot move.”
Reprint 2025-26
30 / Moments
“I am waited for in Egypt,” said the swallow. “My friends ar e
flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the lar ge lotus flowers.
Soon they will go to sleep.”
The Prince asked the swallow to stay with him for one night
and be his messenger . “The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so
sad,” he said.
“I don’t think I like boys,” answer ed the swallow. “I want to go
to Egypt.”
But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little swallow was
sorry. “It is very cold her e,” he said. But he agr eed to stay with
him for one night and be his messenger .
“Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.
The swallow picked out the gr eat ruby fr om the Prince’s swor d,
and flew away with it in his beak over the r oofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower , wher e the white marble angels
were sculptur ed.  He passed by the palace and hear d the sound of
dancing. A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover .
“I hope my dr ess will be r eady in time for the State ball,” she
said. “I have or dered flowers to be embr oider ed on it, but the
seamstr esses ar e so lazy.”
He passed over the river , and saw the lanter ns hanging on the
masts of the ships. At last he came to the poor woman’s house
and looked in. The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the
mother had fallen asleep, she was so tir ed. In he hopped, and
laid the gr eat ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble. Then
he flew gently r ound the bed, fanning the boy’s for ehead with his
wings. “How cool I feel!” said the boy, “I must be getting better;”
and he sank into a delicious slumber .
Then the swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him
what he had done. “It is curious,” he r emarked, “but I feel quite
warm now, although it is so cold.”
“That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.
And the little swallow began to think, and then fell asleep. Thinking
always made him sleepy.
When day br oke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
“Tonight I go to Egypt,” said the swallow, and he was in high
Reprint 2025-26
The Happy Prince/ 31
spirits at the pr ospect. He visited all the monuments and sat a
long time on top of the chur ch steeple.
When the moon r ose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“Have you any commissions for Egypt?” he cried. “I am
just starting.”
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you
stay with me one night longer?”
“I am waited for in Egypt,” answer ed the swallow.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away
across the city I see a young man in a garr et. He is leaning over a
desk cover ed with papers, and in the glass by his side ther e is a
bunch of wither ed violets. His hair is br own and crisp, and his
lips ar e red as a pomegranate, and he has lar ge and dr eamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a play for the Dir ector of the Theatr e, but he
is too cold to write any mor e. Ther e is no fir e in the grate, and
hunger has made him faint.”
“I will wait with you one night longer ,” said the swallow, who
really had a good heart. He asked if he should take another ruby
to the young playwright.
“Alas! I have no ruby now,” said the Prince. “My eyes ar e all
that I have left. They ar e made of rar e sapphir es, which wer e
Reprint 2025-26
32 / Moments
brought out of India a thousand
years ago.” He or dered the
swallow to pluck out one of
them and take it to the
playwright. “He will sell it to the
jeweller , and buy fir ewood, and
finish his play,” he said.
“Dear Prince,” said the
swallow, “I cannot do that,” and
he began to weep.
“Swallow, Swallow, little
Swallow,” said the Prince, “do
as I command you.”
So the swallow plucked out
the Prince’s eye, and flew away
to the young man’s garr et. It
was easy enough to get in, as ther e was a hole in the r oof. Thr ough
this he darted, and came into the r oom. The young man had his
head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the
bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful
sapphir e lying on the wither ed violets.
“I am beginning to be appr eciated,” he cried. “This is fr om some
great admir er. Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.
The next day the swallow flew down to the harbour . He sat on
the mast of a lar ge vessel and watched the sailors working. “I am
going to Egypt,” cried the swallow, but nobody minded, and when
the moon r ose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“I have come to bid you goodbye,” he cried.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you
not stay with me one night longer?”
“It is winter ,” answer ed the swallow, “and the snow will soon
be her e. In Egypt the sun is war m on the gr een palm tr ees, and
the cr ocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.”
“In the squar e below,” said the Happy Prince, “ther e stands a
little matchgirl. She has let her matches fall in the gutter , and
they ar e all spoiled. Her father will beat her if she does not bring
home some money, and she is crying. She has no shoes or
Reprint 2025-26
The Happy Prince/ 33
stockings, and her little head is bar e. Pluck out my other eye,
and give it to her , and her father will not beat her .”
“I will stay with you one night longer ,” said the swallow, “but I
cannot pluck out your eye. Y ou would be quite blind then.”
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I
command you.”
So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down
with it. He swooped past the matchgirl, and slipped the jewel into
the palm of her hand.
“What a lovely bit of glass!” cried the little girl; and she ran
home, laughing.
Then the swallow came back to the Prince. “Y ou ar e blind
now,” he said, “so I will stay with you always.”
“No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away
to Egypt.”
“No, I will stay with you always,” said the swallow, and he
slept at the Prince’s feet.
All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder , and told him
stories of what he had seen in strange lands.
“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous
things, but mor e marvellous than anything is the suf fering of
men and women. Ther e is no Mystery so gr eat as Misery. Fly over
my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see ther e.”
So the swallow flew over the gr eat city, and saw the rich making
merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars wer e sitting at
the gates. He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of
starving childr en looking out listlessly at the black str eets. Under
the ar chway of a bridge two little boys wer e lying in each other’s
arms to try and keep themselves war m. “How hungry we ar e!”
they said. “Y ou must not lie her e,” shouted the watchman, and
they wander ed out into the rain.
Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
“I am cover ed with fine gold,” said the Prince. “Y ou must take
it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to the poor; the living always think
that gold can make them happy.”
Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the swallow picked of f, till the
Happy Prince looked quite dull and gr ey. Leaf after leaf of the
Reprint 2025-26
34 / Moments
fine gold he br ought to the poor , and the childr en’s faces gr ew
rosier, and they laughed and played in the str eet. “W e have br ead
now!” they cried.
Then the snow came, and after the snow came the fr ost. The
streets looked as if they wer e made of silver . Everybody went about
in furs, and the little boys wor e scarlet caps and skated on the ice.
The poor little swallow gr ew colder and colder , but he would
not leave the Prince, he loved him too well. He picked up crumbs
outside the baker’s door when the baker was not looking, and
tried to keep himself war m by flapping his wings.
But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just
enough str ength to fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once mor e.
“Goodbye, dear Prince!” he mur mured. “W ill you let me kiss your
hand?
“I am glad that you ar e going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,”
said the Prince. “Y ou have stayed too long her e but you must kiss
me on the lips, for I love you.”
“It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the swallow. “I am going
to the House of Death. Death is the br other of Sleep, is he not?”
And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down
dead at his feet.
At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as
if something had br oken. The fact is that the leaden heart had
snapped right in two. It certainly was a dr eadfully har d frost.
Early the next mor ning the Mayor was walking in the squar e
below in company with the T own Councillors. As they passed the
column he looked up at the statue. “Dear me! How shabby the
Happy Prince looks!” he said.
“How shabby, indeed!” cried the T own Councillors, who always
agreed with the Mayor and they went up to look at it.
“The ruby has fallen out of his swor d, his eyes ar e gone, and
he is golden no longer ,” said the Mayor . “In fact, he is little better
than a beggar!”
“Little better than a beggar ,” said the T own Councillors.
“And her e is actually a dead bir d at his feet!” continued the
Mayor . “We must r eally issue a pr oclamation that bir ds ar e not
Reprint 2025-26
The Happy Prince/ 35
to be allowed to die her e.” And the T own Clerk made a note of
the suggestion.
So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince. “As he is
no longer beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Pr ofessor
at the University.
Then they melted the statue in a fur nace. “What a strange
thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry. “This
broken lead heart will not melt in the fur nace. W e must thr ow it
away.” So they thr ew it on a dust heap wher e the dead swallow
was also lying.
“Bring me the two most pr ecious things in the city,” said God
to one of His Angels; and the Angel br ought Him the leaden
heart and the dead bir d.
“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my gar den of
Paradise this little bir d shall sing for ever mor e and in my city
of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me.”
OSCAR WILDE
Reprint 2025-26
36 / Moments
Glossary
seamstr ess: a woman who makes a living by sewing
thimble:  a metal or plastic cap with a closed end,
worn to pr otect the finger and push the needle in
sewing
garret: small dark r
oom at the top of the house
1.Why do the courtiers call the prince ‘the Happy Prince’? Is he
really happy? What does he see all around him?
2.Why does the Happy Prince send a ruby for the seamstr ess?
What does the swallow do in the seamstress’ house?
3.For whom does the prince send the sapphires and why?
4.What does the swallow see when it flies over the city?
5.Why did the swallow not leave the prince and go to Egypt?
6.What are the pr ecious things mentioned in the story? Why are
they pr ecious?
The little swallow says, “It is curious, but I feel quite war m now,
although it is so cold.” Have you ever had such a feeling? Share
your experience with your friends.
/circle6‘The Selfish Giant’ by Oscar W ilde.
/circle6‘How Much Land Does a Man Require?’ by Leo T olstoy
T TTTTHINKHINKHINK HINKHINK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
T TTTTALKALKALK ALKALK A  A A  A ABOUT BOUTBOUT BOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R  R READING EADINGEADING EADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26