“KIND sir, have pity; tur n your attention to a poor , hungry man!
For thr ee days I have had nothing to eat; I haven’t five copecks
for a lodging, I swear it befor e God.  For eight years I was a
village schoolteacher and then I lost my place thr ough intrigues.
I fell a victim to calumny.  It is a year now since I have had
anything to do.”
The advocate, Ser gei, looked at the ragged, fawn-colour ed
overcoat of the suppliant, at his dull, drunken eyes, at the r ed
spot on either cheek, and it seemed to him as if he had seen this
man somewher e befor e.
“I have now had an of fer of a position in the pr ovince of Kaluga,”
the mendicant went on, “but I haven’t the money to get ther e.
Help me kindly; I am ashamed to ask, but — I am obliged to
by cir cumstances.”
Sergei’s eyes fell on the man’s overshoes, one of which was
high and the other low, and he suddenly r emember ed something.
“Look her e, it seems to me I met you the day befor e yester day
in Sadovya Str eet,” he said; “but you told me then that you wer e
a student who had been expelled, and not a village schoolteacher .
Do you r emember?”
“N-no, that can’t be so,” mumbled the beggar , taken aback. “I
am a village schoolteacher , and if you like I can show you
my papers.”
“Have done with lying! Y ou called yourself a student and even
told me what you had been expelled for . Don’t you r emember?”
Sergei flushed and tur ned fr om the ragged cr eature with an
expression of disgust.9. The Beggar
What induced the beggar , Lushkoff, to change his
ways?  Let’ s read and find out.
Reprint 2025-26
The Beggar/ 57
“This is dishonesty, my dear sir!” he cried angrily. “This is
swindling — I shall send the police for you, damn you!”
“Sir!” he said, laying his hand on his heart, “the fact is I was
lying! I am neither a  student nor a schoolteacher .  All that was
fiction.  For merly I sang in a Russian choir and was sent away
for drunkenness.  But what else can I do?  I can’t get along
without lying.  No one will give me anything when I tell the truth,
what can I do?”
“What can you do?  Y ou ask what you can do?” cried
Sergei, coming close to him. “W ork! That’s what you can do!
You must work!”
“Work — yes. I know that myself; but wher e can I find work?”
“How would you like to chop wood for me?”
“I wouldn’t r efuse to do that, but in these days even skilled
wood-cutters find themselves sitting without br ead.”
“Will you come and chop wood for me?”
“Yes sir , I will.”
“Very well; we’ll soon find out.”
Sergei hastened along, rubbing his hands. He called his cook
out of the kitchen.
“Her
e, Olga,” he said, “take this gentleman into the wood-shed
and let him chop wood.”
The scar ecrow of a beggar shrugged his shoulders, as if in
perplexity, and went irr esolutely after the cook.  It was obvious
from his gait that he had not consented to go and chop wood
because he was hungry and wanted work, but simply fr om pride
and shame and because he had been trapped by his own wor ds.
It was obvious, too, that his str ength had been under mined by
vodka and that he was unhealthy and did not feel the slightest
inclination for toil.
Sergei hurried into the dining-r oom. Fr om its windows one
could see the wood-shed and everything that went on in the yar d.
Standing at the window, Ser gei saw the cook and the beggar come
out into the yar d by the back door and make their way acr oss the
dirty snow to the shed. Olga glar ed wrathfully at her companion,
shoved him aside with her elbow, unlocked the shed, and angrily
banged the door .
Reprint 2025-26
58 / Moments
Next he saw the pseudo-teacher seat himself on a log and
become lost in thought with his r ed cheeks r esting on his fists.
The woman flung down an axe at his feet, spat angrily, and,
judging fr om the expr ession of her lips, began to scold him. The
beggar irr esolutely pulled a billet of wood towar ds him, set it up
between his feet, and tapped it feebly with the axe. The billet
waver ed and fell down.  The beggar again pulled it to him, blew
on his fr eezing hands, and tapped it with his axe cautiously, as if
afraid of hitting his overshoe or of cutting of f his finger; the stick
of wood again fell to the gr ound.
Sergei’s anger had vanished and he now began to feel a little
sorry and ashamed of himself for having set a spoiled, drunken,
perhaps sick man to work at menial labour in the cold.
An hour later Olga came in and announced that the wood had
all been chopped.
“Good! Give him half a r ouble,” said Ser gei.  “If he wants to he
can come back and cut wood on the first day of each month.  W e
can always find work for him.”
On the first of the month the waif made his appearance and
again ear ned half a r ouble, although he could bar ely stand on his
legs. Fr om that day on he often appear ed in the yar d and every
Reprint 2025-26
The Beggar/ 59
time work was found for him. Now he would shovel snow, now put
the wood-shed in or der, now beat the dust out of rugs and
mattr esses. Every time he r eceived fr om twenty to forty copecks,
and once, even a pair of old tr ousers wer e sent out to him.
When Ser gei moved into another house he hir ed him to help
in the packing and hauling of the fur nitur e. This time the waif
was sober , gloomy, and silent. He har dly touched the fur nitur e,
and walked behind the wagons hanging his head, not even making
a pretence of appearing busy. He only shiver ed in the cold and
became embarrassed when the carters jeer ed at him for his
idleness, his feebleness, and his tatter ed, fancy over coat. After
the moving was over Ser gei sent for him.
“Well, I am happy that my wor ds have taken ef fect,’” he said,
handing him a r ouble. “Her e’s for your pains.  I see you ar e sober
and have no objection to work.  What is your name?’”
“Lushkof f.”
“Well, Lushkof f, I can now of fer you some other , cleaner
employment.  Can you write?’”
“I can.”
“Then take this letter to a friend of mine tomorr ow and you
will be given some copying to do.  W ork har d, don’t drink, and
remember what I have said to you. Goodbye!”
Pleased at having put a man on the right path, Ser gei tapped
Lushkof f kindly on the shoulder and even gave him his hand at
parting.  Lushkof f took the letter , and fr om that day forth came
no mor e to the yar d for work.
Two years went by. Then one evening, as Ser gei was standing
at the ticket window of a theatr e paying for his seat, he noticed a
little man beside him with a coat collar of curly fur and a wor n
sealskin cap. This little individual timidly asked the ticket seller
for a seat in the gallery and paid for it in copper coins.
“Lushkof f, is that you?” cried Ser gei, r ecognising in the little
man his for mer wood-chopper . “How ar e you? What ar e you doing?
How is everything with you?”
“All right.  I am a notary now and am paid thirty-five r oubles
a month.”
Reprint 2025-26
60 / Moments
“Thank Heaven! That’s
fine! I am delighted for
your sake. I am very, very
glad, Lushkof f.  You see,
you ar e my godson, in a
sense.  I gave you a push
along the right path, you
know. Do you r emember
what a r oasting I gave you,
eh? I nearly had you
sinking into the gr ound at
my feet that day.  Thank
you, old man, for not
forgetting my wor ds.”
“Thank you, too.” said
Lushkof f. “If I hadn’t
come to you then I might
still have been calling
myself a teacher or a
student to this day.  
Yes, by flying to your pr otection I dragged
myself out of a pit.”
“I am very glad, indeed.”
“Thank you for your kind wor ds and deeds. I am very grateful
to you and to your cook. God bless that good and noble woman!
You spoke finely then, and I shall be indebted to you to my
dying day; but, strictly speaking, it was your cook, Olga,
who saved me.”
“How is that?”
“When I used to come to your house to chop wood she used to
begin: ‘Oh, you sot, you! Oh, you miserable cr eatur e! Ther e’s
nothing for you but ruin.’ And then she would sit down opposite
me and gr ow sad, look into my face and weep. ‘Oh, you unlucky
man! Ther e is no pleasur e for you in this world and ther e will be
none in the world to come.  Y ou drunkar d!  You will bur n in hell.
Oh, you unhappy one!’ And so she would carry on, you know, in
that strain.  I can’t tell you how much misery she suf fered, how
many tears she shed for my sake.  But the chief thing was — she
Reprint 2025-26
The Beggar/ 61
used to chop the wood for me.  Do you know, sir , that I did not
chop one single stick of wood for you?  She did it all. Why this
saved me, why I changed, why I stopped drinking at the sight of
her I cannot explain. I only know that, owing to her wor ds and
noble deeds, a change took place in my heart; she set me right
and I shall never for get it.  However , it is time to go now; ther e
goes the bell.” Lushkof f bowed and departed to the gallery.
ANTON CHEKHOV
Glossary
copeck (also spelt  kopeck ): Russian coin equal to one hundr edth
of a r ouble
calumny:
 the making of false and defamatory statements about
someone in order to damage his/her reputation
suppliant (or supplicant) : a person making a humble plea to
someone in power or authority
mendicant:  beggar
swindling: cheating a person of money
perplexity: state of being puzzled; bewilder ment
irresolutely:  hesitantly; undecidedly
billet: her e, a thick piece of wood
waif:  a homeless person
shovel: r emove snow with a shovel (a tool resembling a spade
with a br oad blade and typically uptur ned sides)
roasting (an infor mal or humor ous wor d): here, scolding
sot: a habitual drunkard
1.Has Lushkof f become a beggar by cir cumstance or by choice?
2.What r easons does he give to Sergei for his telling lies?
3.Is Lushkof f a willing worker? Why, then, does he agr ee to
chop wood for Ser gei?
T TTTTHINKHINKHINKHINKHINK A  A A A ABOUT BOUTBOUTBOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
Reprint 2025-26
62 / Moments
4.Sergei says, “I am happy that my wor ds have taken ef fect.”
Why does he say so? Is he right in saying this?
5.Lushkof f is ear ning thirty five r oubles a month. How is he
obliged to Ser
gei for this?
6.During their conversation Lushkof f reveals that Ser gei’s cook,
Olga, is r esponsible for the positive change in him. How has
Olga saved Lushkof f?
How can we help beggars/abolish begging?
l‘The Man with the Twisted Lip’ by Arthur Conan Doyle
lThe Thr ee Sisters  by Anton Chekhov
T TTTTALKALKALKALKALK A  A A A ABOUT BOUTBOUTBOUTBOUT I  I I I IT TTTT
S SSSSUGGESTEDUGGESTEDUGGESTED UGGESTEDUGGESTED  R  R R R READING EADINGEADINGEADINGEADING
Reprint 2025-26